# Tutorial #1
- Generally it would be more cost effective to prepare your data locally and then move your data to an S3 bucket. Both the boto3 SDK and the SageMaker SDK provide capabilities to transfer data from your notebook instance to Amazon S3 buckets. Keep in mind that an S3 bucket is a must-have item for using SageMaker.
- Let's assume you have a ML model, you have three options
  - **Tutorial #1**: Training a ML model on an SageMaker notebook instance This notebook assumed you have already uploaded your dataset to an S3 bucket. The notebook is called: `sklearn-local-kmeans-iris-flowers.ipynb`
  - **Tutorial #2**: Training a ML model on a dedicated training instance. Use the SageMaker SDK for python from your notebook instance to create a training job that will create a dedicated training instance and train a ML model on the instance. The trained model will be stored in an Amazon S3 bucket, after which you will use another function provided by the Amazon SageMaker Python SDK to deploy the model to a dedicated prediction instance and create a prediction endpoint. Finally, you will use the AWS SageMaker SDK for Python to interact with this prediction endpoint from your Jupyter Notebook file to make predictions on data the model has not seen (the test set). A dedicated training instance is an EC2 instance that is used to train a model from data in an Amazon S3 bucket and save the trained model to another Amazon S3 bucket. However, unlike a notebook instance, a dedicated training instance does not have a Jupyter Notebook server and is terminated automatically once the training process is complete. Dedicated training instances are created from Docker images. For built-in machine learning algorithms, Amazon SageMaker packages the algorithms in Docker images that include the necessary software to train a machine learning model. To get started, launch the `kmeans-iris-flowers.ipynb` notebook instance and use the Upload button to upload the `sklearn-kmeans-training-script.py`.
***

## References
- [GitHub repository for notebooks](https://github.com/asmtechnology/awsmlbook-chapter16)
- Mishra, Abhishek. Machine Learning in the AWS Cloud: Add Intelligence to Applications with Amazon SageMaker and Amazon Rekognition. John Wiley & Sons, 2019.